The Philippines is home to one of the highest amount of Marine Protected Areas in Southeast Asia with a range of 1500 to 1800 MPAs of diverse regulation status. While famous marine parks such as Tubbataha reef are managed at a national level (under the NIPAS act) with the ambition to protect and enhance biodiversity, most marine protected areas are locally managed. Understanding the close relationship Filipinos have with the ocean and the dependance coastal communities have on its resources, locally-managed marine protected areas are established as a tool to protect and enhance food security for the people. Through regulating human activities and pressures in set areas and ensuring the preservation of healthy, biodiverse key ecosystems such as coral reefs, seagrass and mangroves; they are part of a national strategy to balance the impacts of ﬁshing practices and other human activities and ensure sustainability of the coastal resources. 

Targets for MPA coverage in the Philippines have been speciﬁed in the 1998 Fisheries Code legislation, which calls for 15% of coastal municipal waters (within 15 km of the coastline) to be protected within no-take MPAs, and in the Philippine Marine Sanctuary Strategy (Areco et al 2004), which aims to protect 10% of coral reef area in no-take MPAs by 2020. 

The effectiveness of Marine Protected Areas greatly varies per sites depending on multiple factors including the establishment of a site-specific long term management strategy and allocated resources for its execution and enforcement. 

Through a volunteer-based scientific diving program, Marine Conservation Philippines is focused on collecting and analysing biophysical data on locally-managed MPAs effectiveness & resilience and offer support to local and regional management units.

MCP’s expertise is directed towards commercial productivity of the ecosystem as a primary indicator of effectiveness, followed by substrate composition and resilience considered as indirect indicators, being essential for maintaining productivity and food security over the long-term. MCP’s ecological monitoring program has been developed to be able to provide broad understanding of the regional health and abundance of the reef ecosystems, as well as create very detailed high resolution data sets for individual MPA sites, across individual depth and species level. In this process, quality, high accuracy of the collected data and transparency remains constant priorities at MCP.
OUR MONITORING
Focus
Assess locally managed Protected Areas’s effectiveness at providing food security for the community.

Assess regional reef’s heath and resilience .

Assess threats and sustainability of he local MPAs at keeping on providing desired goods for the community in the coming future.